OK so as far as phase detection is concerned Viola Jones algorithm is the most important approach.
So this algorithm tries to find the most relevant features for a human face.
By the way we can use Viola Jones algorithm to detect for example pedestrians to detect animals and
to detect any kinds of object but usually use it for phase detection.
OK so this algorithm tries to find the most relevant features for a human face when we are dealing with
phase detection and a good question is What are the most relevant features as far as phase detection
is concerned.
For example every human has two eyes a single nose lips forehead and so on.
So we can come up with more shallow than features that can differentiate the human face from an animal
or any other objects.
OK so we can construct an algorithm based on the most relevant features.
And if the algorithm doesn't find one of these features it can come to the conclusion that there is
no human face on that region of the image.
OK.
It is very very important to see that we have to scan the whole image on a step by step basis because
this is what we have been discussing that several regions of the image do not contain a human face at
all.
So for example here as you can see we have four faces but otherwise this image doesn't contain any human
faces.
There are lots of lots of other objects for example of watch for example a shirt for example a table
mineral voters microphone and so on.
But these are not human faces.
OK what's extremely important that this algorithm handles grayscale images.
So the first step of the algorithm is to convert the image into grayscale soda's.
Viola Jones algorithm was formulated by Paul Viola and Michael Jones in 2000 and won it is a machine
learning algorithm in the sense that it needs a training.
So there's going to be a training phase and there's a testing phase of course when we try to detect
faces on a new image.
What's extremely important that the algorithm needs positive images so images of faces as you can see
these are the images on the left.
So we have a face of a girl.
We have a face of a man.
We have a face of another girl a face of a guy and so on.
So we have positive images so images of faces and the algorithm needs negative images as well so images
without faces such as an image of of course an image of a car an image of an airplane.
So this is how Viola Jones algorithm learns the most relevant features whether the image contains a
human face or the image doesn't contain a human face.
So this is what we have been talking about that that's the main difference between supervised learning
when we have positive image exclusivity.
So images of the handwritten digits for example these dataset doesn't contain any negative images on
the other hand when dealing with computer vision and face detection we need positive images so images
of human faces and negative images so images with our faces as we can see the images on the right in
order to be able to detect the human faces on a new image.
So if we have a greyscale image we have to define a window size with a given faith and are given with
of course these are going to be the parameters of the algorithm and if we just have to check on every
duration whether the given window contains the most relevant features What are these features.
Eyes nose lips forehead and so on.
OK you may pose the question that how to construct these features.
Basically this is what we are going to talk about in the next lectures.
So now let's focus on the big picture.
So we have a window like this and diagram them is going to look for the most relevant features.
Are there any eyes nose lips forehead or something like this on this image.
No.
So we keep shifting the window one step to the right.
OK.
Are there any eyes nose or lips.
No.
OK we shift the window one step to the right.
OK diag rhythm can come to the conclusion that there's a single eye.
And it is something like a nose but we are looking for two eyes.
We are looking for a nose.
We are looking for the lips.
So this window doesn't contain flips so the algorithm can come to the conclusion that it is not a human
face.
OK let's take another step to the right.
It is something like a human face because there are two eyes there's a forehead there's a nose but the
lips are missing.
OK.
So this is not a human face let's shave the window again.
We have a single eye and a nose a we Dowdle lips and OK it is something like the human eye.
It is the left side of the image.
So it is not that straightforward.
OK let's shift the window one step to the right.
OK there's one eye.
There is no nose there's no lips.
There's just a half forehead.
So it is definitely not a human face.
Ok then we have to re-initialize the window in the sense that again we are going to scan the whole image
on a horizontal manner but we have to increment in a vertical manner as well.
So that's why we are going to shift the window one step downwards.
And again we have to scan the whole image.
Ok this window doesn't contain the most relevant features so let's take one step to the right.
Again the most relevant features are missing.
Let's take one step to the right.
OK there's one human eye.
There is no nose.
It is something like human lips.
Ok but it is not a human face.
Let's take one step to the right.
And as you can see the algorithm is going to find all the relevant features as far as a human face is
concerned.
There are two eyes.
There's a single nose.
There's some forehead.
There are the lips and so on.
So the agony then will come to the conclusion that the window contains a human face.
OK so that's why there's a green box.
Let's take another step to the right and the algorithm again will come to the conclusion that the next
window contains a human face as well as you can see we have all the relevant feature as our eyes nose
lips.
OK let's take one step to the right.
There's no human face because we don't have all the features.
OK so let's shave the window in a vertical manner and let's scan the image again horizontally.
OK this window doesn't contain the most 11 features.
So we take one step to the right.
Again there are no relevant features again and no relevant features.
OK we have lips we have the nose but we don't have the eyes.
We don't have the forehead.
We don't have the eyebrows and so on.
OK.
So let's go on.
This window doesn't contain the most relevant features.
And this is the end of the image.
We have managed to consider all the sub regions as far as this window is concerned of the given image
and we have come to the conclusion that with high probability this is a human face because it contains
all the relevant features.
So this is how Viola Jones rhythm works in the background and maybe you pose the question that OK we
know that we have to deal with the most relevant features but how to detect these relevant features.
How do computers able to detect eyes eyebrows nose lips and so on.
And this is why Harvill lots and hard features came to be.
OK so far so good but we have a huge problem with this approach.
For example in this image the size of the head or the face is quite large but there may be situations
where the size of the face on the given image is much smaller.
So the problem with this approach that the size of the faces may differ.
Why is it a problem.
Because the window size may be too small to include all the relevant features of the face.
So the algorithm will not work fine for example if we have an image like this with a smaller window
size.
For example the window size is like this data.
Of course this window size is not big enough to include all the relevant features.
It may detract one of the eyes.
Then in the next iteration it will detect some part of the nose then in the next iteration it will detect
the right eye.
Then in one of the next iterations it will detect some part of the lips and so on.
But there's not going to be a case when the window includes all the relevant features so the algorithm
may come to the conclusion that there is no human face on the image.
And of course it's not true.
The problem is that the window size is too small.
OK so somehow we have to make sure that these images and the size of the faces will be transformed to
approximately the same size.
OK.
And basically this is why these scale factor is present in open C.v.
So this feature compensates for this issue.
So the issue is that some faces may be closer to the camera which means they appear bigger than our
faces in the background.
OK so we have been talking about that Viola Jones algorithm is a machine learning algorithm.
So it has a training phase and in that training procedure.
Viola Jones algorithm uses 24 by 24 pixels images.
So we have to rescale the input image as well.
So we can resize a larger face to a smaller one and there is not going to be problems like this.
OK so this is why we have to use this scale factor in order to make sure that all the faces will have
approximately the same size and it's going to enable Viola Jones algorithm to the tag defaces on a new
image.
Thanks for watching.